New tutorial for ROS 2 rqt_console (#351)
ros2/ros2_documentation: source/Tutorials/rqt_console/UsingRqt_console.rst

.. _rqt_console:

Using rqt_console
=================

**Goal:** Get to know ``rqt_console``, a tool for introspecting log messages.

**Tutorial level:** Beginner

**Time:** 5 minutes

.. contents:: Contents
   :depth: 2
   :local:

Background
----------

``rqt_console`` is a GUI tool used to introspect log messages in ROS 2.

> Typically, log messages show up in your terminal.

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr as a slight tweak, I'd talk about `stdout` instead (if you think that's reasonable for a beginner level tutorial).

Author: I think stdout outputs to the terminal anyway (in this case where they're working in the terminal), right? So it's ok. Unless you feel strongly about it; I just don't want to get into explaining another topic.

With ``rqt_console``, you can collect those messages over time, view them closely and in a more organized manner, filter them, save them and even reload the saved files to introspect at a different time.

> Nodes use logs to output messages, specifically on the ``/rosout`` topic.

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr hmm, this statement may lead to confusion. Logs are informational messages about events and/or status, usually for human consumption. These messages may be handled in a variety of ways, none mandatory, and it just happens that one of those is to publish over `rosout`. I'd keep topic publishing and logging conceptually separate. Each has its own specific API and purpose.

> The information that a node sends as a message is entirely up to the person who creates the node.

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr hmm this is a bit of an oversimplification. Both core ROS libraries and third-party ROS-aware libraries used by a node may also generate logs, and while a log message intent is well defined by his/her author, its content may not be fully defined till runtime (e.g. one may log the average rate of a topic subscription whenever it drops below a configurable value).

Usually log messages are included in a node to explain things happening behind the scenes that might be useful for users to know.

Prerequisites
-------------

You will need ``rqt_console`` and ``turtlesim`` installed.

.. link to turtlesim tutorial

As always, don’t forget to source ROS 2 in **every new terminal you open**.

Tasks
-----

1 Setup
^^^^^^^

Start ``rqt_console`` in a new terminal with the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 run rqt_console rqt_console

The ``rqt_console`` window will open:

.. image:: console.png

The first section of the console is where log messages from your system will display.

In the middle you have the option to filter messages by excluding severity levels.
You can also add more exclusion filters using the plus-sign button to the right.

The bottom section is for highlighting messages that include a string you input.
You can add more filters to this section as well.

Now start ``turtlesim`` with the following command:

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 run turtlesim turtlesim_node

2 Messages on rqt_console
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> When ``turtlesim`` starts, you will see two messages appear in ``rqt_console``:

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr meta: I think it'd be nice to leave a note here, briefly explaining why logs may not reliably show up in `rqt_console`. For instance,

```
.. note::
   
   Don't panic if these messages do show up on the terminal but not reliably on ``rqt_console``. That's a consequence of ROS 2 distributed architecture, specifically _node discovery_ latency and a low overhead, best-effort _QoS_ being used for `/rosout` publications and subscriptions. You may learn more about the benefits and caveats of this architecture at (link).
```

Reviewer: @clalancette are you using `dashing-devel` for `rqt_console`? :)

Reviewer 2: I was using the packages released into both Dashing and Eloquent (1.1.0 for both).  Is there a bugfix I'm missing?

Reviewer: Hmm, no, that's correct.

Author: @clalancette same for me, I just based that off of what happened when @hidmic ran it since that's what's supposed to happen

Reviewer 2: OK.  I think we need to figure out what the expectation is before posting this, though, so we don't confuse people.  I can take a closer look, but probably not until next week.

Author: Thanks @clalancette, next week is good

Reviewer 2: All right, I looked into this in Dashing and from the latest sources.

With Dashing, I don't get the initial INFO log messages 100% of the time.  With the latest sources (which also includes the latest Fast-RTPS), I get the initial INFO log messages maybe 30% of the time.  However, if I call the `/clear` service, for instance, I always get the informational message that is printed out.

What I think is happening is that it can take some time for the discovery in the network to happen, and in particular for the `/rosout` publisher in the turtlesim node to hook up to the `/rosout` subscriber in the rqt_console node (or in `ros2 topic`, which I was also testing with).  I'm guessing that newer Fast-RTPS does discovery a bit faster, which explains why I get the messages sometimes.

So what all of that says here is that we shouldn't expect the users to see those initial messages (particularly on Dashing, where it never seems to discover in time).  Rather, it's probably worthwhile to either remove this section, or add a note saying that you *might* see informational messages at startup.  We'll see messages for sure down below when we run the turtle into a wall.

.. code-block:: bash

         Starting turtlesim with node name /turtlesim

>          Spawning turtle [turtle1] at x=[5.544445], y=[5.544445], theta=[0.000000]

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr if this is a command-line output excerpt, it seems to me we're not clearly differentiating it from `rqt_console`.

.. image:: info.png

Notice the severity column; both messages have the ``Info`` severity level.

To see messages of a different severity level, let’s have the turtle run into the wall.
In a new terminal, enter the ``ros2 topic pub`` command (discussed in detail in the topics tutorial) below:

.. link topics tutorial

.. code-block:: bash

    ros2 topic pub -r 1 /turtle1/cmd_vel geometry_msgs/msg/Twist '{linear: {x: 2.0, y: 0.0, z: 0.0}, angular: {x: 0.0,y: 0.0,z: 0.0}}'

> Since the above command is publishing the topic at a steady rate, the turtle is continuously running into the wall.

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr consider 
```suggestion
Since we'll be publishing velocity commands at a steady rate, the turtle will continuously run into the wall, even after hitting it.
```

In ``rqt_console`` you will see the same message with the ``Warn`` severity level displayed over and over, like so:

.. image:: warn.png

Press ``Ctrl+C`` in the terminal where you ran the ``ros2 topic pub`` command to stop your turtle from running into the wall.

3 Logger levels
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

ROS 2’s logger levels are ordered by severity:

.. code-block:: bash

    Fatal
    Error
    Warn
    Info
    Debug

> As mentioned earlier, the person who creates the node writes the log messages and assigns a severity level to each message.

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr nit: `person` -> `author`.

There is no exact standard for what each level indicates, but it’s safe to assume that:

* ``Fatal`` messages indicate when something goes wrong, and causes the system to crash.
* ``Error`` messages indicate when something goes wrong, and the desired behavior will not work.
* ``Warn`` messages indicate when something goes wrong, but the process will continue regardless.
* ``Info`` messages indicate significant checkpoints, like a node starting, action goal completing, etc.

> * ``Debug`` messages indicate background processes, and are typically very verbose.

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr meta: I think it's worth revisiting these definitions. [Here](https://www.scalyr.com/blog/logging-levels/) there are some nice alternatives that do not directly apply to ROS 2 but get rather close.

The default level is ``Info``.
You will only see messages of the default severity level and higher.

Normally, only ``Debug`` messages are hidden because they’re the only level less severe than ``Info``.
For example, if you set the default level to ``Warn``, you would only see messages of severity ``Warn``, ``Error``, and ``Fatal``.

3.1 Set the default logger level
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can set the default logger level when you first run the ``/turtlesim`` node using remapping.
Enter the following command in your terminal:

.. code-block:: bash

        ros2 run turtlesim turtlesim_node __log_level:=WARN

Now you won’t see the initial ``Info`` level warnings that came up in the console last time you started ``turtlesim``.
That’s because ``Info`` messages are lower priority than the new default severity, ``Warn``.

Summary
-------

``rqt_console`` can be very helpful if you need to closely examine the log messages from your system.

> You might want to examine log messages for any number of reasons, usually to find out where something went wrong and the series of processes leading up to that.

Reviewer: @maryaB-osr nit: `the series of processes` -> `the series of events`
